There are some sermons, messages that I wish I could sit down with each individual over a cup of coffee at a table instead of trying to do them for a whole crowd.
They're almost better conversations than they are sermons, but some things need to be spoken on.
And this is the platform with which I've been given to do that.
And so I want you to know from my heart to yours, not trying to set a heavy tone, but we've been talking about through this series that those of us who are followers of Jesus, we have a mission to help people find and follow Jesus.
And we know that.
And almost every church will tell you the same thing, right?
And they'll say it in their way.
We're helping people far from God experience life and Christ.
It's the same thing, right?
We're all trying to do the same mission.
in different ways and different approaches.
But I believe what's most important is not that you do the mission.
I believe it's how you do it, how you accomplish it.
Jesus never had the ends justify the means.
Never, ever, ever, ever.
And that's how church hurt happens is you have a pastor or a group and they're doing things and they're not doing them the right way.
You can't find the way they're doing them in scripture, but
The church is growing, people are being reached, people are being baptized, and so boards and church members, trying to just, man, I gotta, I'll just look the other way because, man, look at what's happening instead of looking at how they're doing it.
And that's what we're talking about today.
Jesus did the mission big time, right?
At the end, he said, it is finished, but along the way, he taught us how to do it.
And one of the ways that he said he did it, he actually described his heart this way.
As he said, he was gentle and humble or lowly in heart.
Throughout the New Testament, you can see Jesus flipping tables.
You can see Jesus calling out the leaders, both political leaders, religious leaders, both in the Roman government and his own Sadducees Pharisees that were inside the temple, he called them vipers.
He called them blind guides.
He called them wicked.
He said, render unto Caesar what his Caesar's and rendered to God what is God's.
He broke the Old Testament law on their eyes.
He broke the Sabbath in their eyes.
Never think that Jesus just kept what was right inside of himself.
Oh, he did not.
He did not.
He stood up for justice.
He stood up for the oppressed.
He stood by a woman caught in adultery and said, go ahead, throw your stones if you are without sin.
Right?
But all the while he did all that, even tossing tables, he was gentle and he was humble in heart.
We live in a world that is at war with gentleness and humility.
We live in an era where main character energy, I'm going to define that for you, is the goal and winning the argument is the currency.
Now, what is main character energy?
Main character energy refers to the modern culture trend of viewing one's own life as a movie where you are the undisputed star and everyone else is merely a supporting actor, an extra or a plot device.
Don't like that.
And we've all done it.
I have done main character energy.
usually on Knoxville about twice a week.
I don't care that you're 100, and so it's safer for you to drive 35.
I care that I'm trying to get to Chick-fil-A before my one o'clock meeting.
Main character energy, right?
In a world that is opposite to gentleness and humility, this mindset represents the peak of self-centrality, which in turn, here's what happens.
In turn, it creates
some of the following things, and you're gonna have to hang with me.
The beginning of this message is you're gonna have to work, okay?
I know it's cold, I know it's winter, I know it all like to be sitting by a fire, right?
You're not.
You're in this cold worship center, welcome, or you're at home by a fire.
Right?
You're gonna have to work with me, okay?
At the beginning.
And then we're gonna turn it up, okay?
Here's what main character energy produces.
It produces a theological conflict, it produces then relational cost, then it produces societal impact, and it all happens in this stage that we call social media.
Let me break down each one.
The theological conflict, here's what it is.
It is I, verse he, okay?
This is the theological conflict throughout our entire world, and we can shrink it down to our country, but it's worldwide.
Humility is the recognition that God is the center of the universe.
Main character energy, I, is the functional belief that you are the center.
Our world says this is my story, my truth, and my happiness, right?
Even our founding fathers said it.
Every one of us is entitled to what?
Life, liberty, and what?
Pursuit of happiness.
Said who?
Got nowhere in Scripture.
Promise.
Happiness.
Nowhere, all who live Galilean in Christ Jesus shall suffer persecution, right?
The world says, this is my story, my truth, my happiness.
The gospel says he must increase and I must decrease.
That's the conflict.
And we all experience it every day.
Well, I'm trying to increase God and trying to decrease myself.
The world is saying, you should be the main character, bro.
You should be the main character.
Everything should be conveniently laid out for you.
Now, what is the result of that?
What happens when main character energy begins to happen among the civilians of our country?
What happens is there's a relational cost, and that relational cost is this.
There is a lack of empathy.
Come on, you see this every single day, right?
There's a lack of empathy.
When someone has main character energy, they struggle to be gentle because they view others' needs as inconveniences.
For example, if a waiter, just think about it, you've done this.
If a waiter is slow, the main character sees it as a personal attack on their schedule rather than a human being having a hard day.
Let me give you a personal example.
I'll open up the cupboards.
I was sitting in Chick-fil-A drive-thru last night.
You know what I text my wife?
Chick-fil-A slow again.
Chick-fil-A slow again, because I've been sitting here longer than Chick-fil-A promised I would sit, right?
What is that?
It's main character energy.
I don't care what the employees are going through.
I don't care if they're short staff.
I don't care if the food is delayed.
I don't care if the weather may have slowed down their process.
I have places to go, right, which creates a lack of empathy.
Now I didn't yell any by your sending email, right?
I'm still pastor in town, still got a testimony to hold up, right?
But it just takes into account us and only us.
This is what David Foster Wallace called our default setting.
This is why your babies are the way they are.
Why are babies the way they are?
Main character energy.
They don't care about you.
If they did, they'd let you sleep.
If they did, they'd change themselves.
If they did, they'd warm up their own bottle, but they don't.
They cry, you came running, and what did they learn?
I got mom on a string, right?
Our dogs are pretty much the same way, right?
Being deeply and literally self-centered, believing that our immediate needs and feelings are what should determine the world's priorities.
Now, where does that go?
If we have relational costs and it's a lack of empathy, what happens?
There's a societal impact.
A major study released in late 2025, so it's recent, was called the civility paradox, right?
It found a staggering gap in how we see ourselves versus how we see the world.
Let me explain it to you.
While the majority of Americans believe they are civil, if we went around the room right now and said, are you civil, right?
You would say, yes, of course, I'm civil.
I'm not trying to cause any problems.
They report that society is becoming increasingly hostile, rude, and aggressive even though most
Civilians consider themselves civil.
Check this out.
Here's the conflict.
Nine out of 10 Americans believe they are personally responsible and civil.
However, 30% believe that others can't be trusted and 43% believe that people are generally kind.
So 57% of Americans believe that people are not generally kind, yet nine out of 10 say, I'm kind.
30% believe, man, I can't trust people, yet 90% believe I can be trusted.
And so what does that lead into?
If we have a lack of empathy and relational cost and we have this societal impact, if we think we're one way when we're actually not, where does that leave?
It leads into a rise of what is called vigilante civility or political hostility.
Strap in.
Recent data from 2024 and 2025 shows a sharp increase in vigilante activity where everyday people
feel justified in using aggression or public shaming to enforce their own views.
This includes our political government.
We justify vigilante civility to balance the scales for the things we do not agree with.
There are some recent places we have seen this, January 6th, insurrection of our capital.
Now you got uncomfortable.
Did you see the flags outside the capital?
Did you see the ones that said Jesus on?
Remember where Jesus said, I'm gentle and humble.
Was that gentle and humble?
Authoritarian rhetoric from political officials on both sides.
is now justified.
People taking it upon themselves to balance the scales.
And the idea is every action causes a worse reaction.
You did this, therefore I can do that.
You said that, therefore I can post this.
You did this so I can kill people.
This is the natural way of main character focus.
We think we're just being selfish, but that selfishness turns into civility, unrest, and vigilante hostility.
And it all happens on what we call the stage of social media.
This is a term that is fairly new still to our culture.
It came with the rise of TikTok and Instagram where people curate their lives to look like a cinematic production.
If fosters an environment where authenticity is replaced by performance, service is replaced by self-promotion, and here's the most dangerous thing.
Now, social media is saying you didn't see what your eyes saw.
We're looking with our own eyes and being told that didn't happen.
And depending on which side we want to be on, we throw out gentleness and humility, and we fall in line.
In mere Christianity, Suez Lewis said pride was the root of all this, and it was a spiritual cancer.
He said, pride gets no pleasure, you can go and put it up there, out of having something, only out of having more of it than the next man.
I'm gonna get pleasure out of having something, I get pleasure when I have more than you.
So what do we do?
How do we do the mission not like that?
Well, thanks be to God, because Jesus lived a counter-cultural lifestyle.
He did not live his life according to the rules in Rome,
He did not live his life according to the rules of the Pharisees, Sadducees and religious zealots.
He lived his life in the spirit of gentleness and humility.
And at the same time, in case you think that's weakness, he became the most known, most famous world changer in history.
Just in case you think like, oh,
Now I'll get nothing done because power does it all in a big voice and being whatever.
He changed the world forever.
We still have arguments about him, right?
So let's dive into it.
He said in Matthew chapter 11 verse 29, let me teach you because I am humble and gentle at heart.
So let's do that today.
However you feel about all the things I just shared
Let's let him teach us today.
To become people of love, which is what we're supposed to become as Jesus followers, Jesus shows us it goes far beyond behavior modification.
While so much of the Christian life can be spent on looking the part, the real change happens inside.
That's the hard work.
Humility and gentleness are never ever formed from the outside in.
That's the most difficult part about the teaching that we're going to lean into is you can't just walk out of here and say, I'm going to be more humble and gentle.
Because it starts in here.
I know it's the worst, right?
It starts in here and then it comes out.
Jesus said it to the Pharisees and scribes in Matthew chapter 23.
He said, here's the way of you Pharisees.
Whoa, to you scribes and Pharisees.
You think Jesus didn't challenge people.
Whoa, to you scribes and Pharisees, hypocrites with an exclamation point.
He said, for you are like white washed tombs, which outwardly appear beautiful.
but are within full of dead people's bones and all uncleanness.
So you also outwardly appear righteous to others, but within you are full of hypocrisy and lawlessness.
Let's talk about whitewashed for a second.
Whitewashed covered the weaknesses of a wall and it concealed the death inside a tomb, but it could not
stop a wall from collapsing or remove the corpse inside.
And because we often appear beautiful, we often never deal with the crack in our walls or the corpse inside.
We just have to be able to walk in church and praise and speak in tongues and lift up our hands and dance around.
Because as long as they see the white wash, they'll never see the deadness inside.
And as long as you cover up the cracks, no one knows they're there.
Oswald Chambers said, man, the most subtle temptation is to live our lives on the surface and never allow God.
Listen to this, to deal with us profoundly.
It is easier for me to whitewash my life than deal with God profoundly.
But a lack of gentleness and humility in our culture is directly connected.
to our limited work inside of ourselves and our primary focus on the outside of ourselves.
We see this in our culture, right?
We'll see someone who's famous, who has a big following.
And unfortunately, it's a horrible tragedy.
They kill themselves.
Death by suicide.
And we're like, what?
What?
Robin Williams, how?
Right?
He's Peter Pan.
He's Mrs. Del Fire.
It was whitewash.
Cover with comedy.
No one knew inside.
Death.
Kate Spade, one of my wife's favorite types of purses.
My least favorite because they're so expensive.
She killed herself.
She makes this beautiful product multi-millionaire.
Beautiful product so worldwide achieved everything she wanted.
White washed.
And that's why we can end up having what we have and why gentleness and humility cannot exist on the outside unless something is dealt with on the inside.
I don't want to give you just a personal example.
I came to Christ on March 1st of 1999, I've told my story 50 times, I don't know what to do today.
I was at a Baptist church there, still loved that church, my home church.
Man, they changed my life.
Here's what happened within a couple weeks of my salvation.
And maybe this is your experience.
Within a couple weeks of my salvation, I knew these truths.
I had never gone to church.
I did not know Jesus.
I didn't know anything about the Bible.
I mean nothing, nothing, nothing.
I was the guy in the audience trying to find Matthew.
Like, come on, bro, help me out.
By the time I found it, the guy moved on to Ezekiel and ain't no way I'm finding an Ezekiel, right?
Let's give up, right?
And here's what I knew within weeks with no knowledge.
You should not have sex before marriage.
I was pretty sad when I learned that one.
Just honest, gosh.
I felt super judged right now, right?
I just met Jesus, calm down, right?
No secular music.
I made major decisions there that I regret.
I threw away a bunch of CDs, children there, these little discs that had music on them.
I threw away a ton of them because of Baptist Church.
About five years later, when I got some freedom in Jesus, I was like, oh,
I wish I had my Dr. Dre album.
I feel more judging.
No cussing.
No more Alcar cigarettes.
I was a smoker back in the day.
Read your Bible every day.
Not because you love Jesus.
Read your Bible every day because I told you to.
Church is a must.
You don't miss church unless you're almost dead or out of town.
That's it.
Like snow at the Baptist church.
Are you kidding?
Like get there, right?
We show grace to you, those of you online, right?
And every man battles lust and you'll never win it.
That's what I learned within weeks.
Notice the theme though, all externally focused things.
After 22 years of self-focused worldly consumption, the church immediately focused on my actions, not my heart.
Immediately said,
Don't, don't, don't.
And if you read your Bible every day, you'll pass a bunch of young adults around you.
And if you can stop doing porn, we might put you in seminary.
I mean, it was outside, outside, outside, right?
The danger of this, according to Brendan Manning, is this, the greatest single cause of atheism in the world today is Christians who acknowledge Jesus with their lips, walk out the door and deny Him by their lifestyle.
You know how we do that?
because we change the outside and the insides full of dead man's bones.
And so every time we get ticked off, it comes out our mouth.
Every time we get offended, it comes out our mouth.
Every time Chick-fil-A is too slow, it comes out our mouth.
And they're like, I thought you believed in Jesus.
But we gotta do the inside work.
And since this has such a profound impact on our mission, God desires deeply to do some work inside to begin to form us into people who are gentle
and humble like his son.
What does Purian need?
Man, what does Purian need?
It needs this, it needs this, it needs this, it needs this, it needs this.
You know what Purian needs?
An army of gospel-loaded, gentle and humble people.
That's what Purian needs.
It needs to be a mouthpiece of God in your life to represent Jesus with gentleness, and humility, and wisdom, and you get fired up about the things that he got fired up.
You don't stay silent, you press into injustice.
with gentleness and humility and listening.
Psalm 51, 6 says, behold, you delight in truth where?
In the inward being.
And you teach me wisdom in the secret heart.
I love that finish there, the secret heart.
Dallas Willis said, gentleness is not the absence of strength, but the perfection of it.
Let's leave that for a second.
Andrew Murray, humility is the displacement of self by the enthronement of God.
It happens inside.
How can gentleness and humility begin to form on the inside of us in a way that transforms us into being the Jesus followers that God desires?
Well, first and foremost, it flows from relationship, doesn't it?
It flows from relationship.
We'll go back to Matthew 11, 29, look what Jesus said.
He said, here, it needs to come from a relationship.
How do you become gentle and humble like me?
It comes from a relationship that is intimate with me.
He says, take, notice the action words, take my yoke upon you, learn from me, for I am gentle and lowly or humble in heart and you will find rest for your souls.
Here's the lesson, passive disciples never do deep transformative work with God.
Never, attending church 1.6 times a month, reading your Bible 1.6 times a month and occasionally throwing up a prayer when a friend gets cancer will never transform the inside of you.
Never, you can whitewash the outside, but doing profound work with God takes profound leaning in.
I wake up every morning, I don't know about you, but I wake up every morning the most selfish person I know.
The most selfish.
The most selfish, why do I get up at 329 this morning?
I was up at 329 this morning.
When it's winter, 329 is awful, right?
The bathroom floor is negative five degrees.
It's awful.
Why do I get up?
Why?
Because it takes me five and a half hours of heart prep to be ready for you at nine.
That's how wicked I am.
That's how selfish I am.
I gotta get up and kill him.
Lay him down.
Remind myself of the mercy and goodness of God.
Let God be gentle with me so I can be gentle with others.
And that's why he says this.
He says, take my yoke upon you.
He wants you to get to the place where you're like, I wanna be gentle and humble in heart.
So I want to yoke myself to you.
I wanna link myself with you.
Cause I know in and of myself, I will not be gentle and I will not be humble.
Because only he says, learn from me.
It's us coming to God saying in relationship,
Teach me your ways.
Here's the beautiful thing about those of us who follow Jesus.
We don't have to wonder what Jesus was like, do we?
We don't have to wonder, right?
Matthew, Mark, Luke, John, Acts, Paul's letters, Old Testament, Jesus shows up all the time, right?
We can go and say, what was he like?
And you come and say, teach me your ways.
And then he says, find.
He said, man, we can be faith-filled, curious about our life with God.
And here's why that is so important.
Closeness with Jesus does not make us impressive.
It makes us gentle.
How do I know if someone's intimate with God?
They're gentle.
They'll be gentle when you fall.
They'll be gentle when you struggle.
So it's to be gentle when you're in sin.
It'll be gentle when you are struggling about a decision.
Because closeness to Jesus, it doesn't make us worldly, impressive.
It makes us gentle.
It makes our social media gentle.
It makes us gentle at work.
Think of any pastor, political leader, religious family member, or friend, and ask yourself,
is there so-called relationship with God producing this in Galatians chapter 5?
Just think about it.
You know, when you hear the pastor who just constantly yells and screams and yells and screams and you're like, man, he's so on fire with God.
Are you sure?
Because Jesus didn't always yell and scream.
He'd always drip sweat on the ground.
I saw a video of this church taking an offering.
The lady walked up with a check for 1,500.
Pastor looked at her and said, I thought I told you 2,500.
Political leaders should say, man, I follow God.
Religious family members should say, man, yeah, I believe in God, I'm a follower.
I'm a believer, right?
Read this and ask yourself if it's true.
But the fruit of the spirit is love, joy, patience, kindness.
If you claim the name of Christ, kindness should be true.
goodness, faithfulness, look at it, gentleness, self-control, against such there is no law, and those who belong to Christ Jesus have crucified the flesh with its passions and desires.
John Stott said, the evidence of our submission to Christ is not how loudly we speak, but how faithfully we obey.
We all can say, I am a believer.
Just one pastor, I love how he says it.
He says, man, but we look in for fruit.
For fruit.
Those are just empty words without gentleness.
Those are just empty words without kindness.
Which is why to become people who are gentle and humble in hearts, we need relationship, but here's the other thing we need, restraint.
Can we use some restraint?
Listen to this in Matthew 26.
This is when Jesus is about to be betrayed by Judas, right?
Jesus said to him, friend, do what you came to do.
Then they came up and laid hands on Jesus and seized them.
And behold, one of those who were Jesus, this guy right here, right here, boldness stretched out his hand and drew his sword and he struck the servant of the high priest and cut off his ear.
Yeah.
Jesus had to love that zeal passion.
Right?
Look what Jesus says.
Listen to the restraint.
Do you think that I cannot appeal to my father and he will at once send me more than 12 legions of angels?
But how then should the scriptures be fulfilled?
That it must be so.
Let me say this to you.
This will help you be gentle and humble as God does work in your heart.
Just because you can doesn't always mean you should.
Just because you can doesn't mean you should.
Just because you can post that doesn't mean you should.
just because you could say that doesn't mean you should.
It also doesn't mean you shouldn't.
But restraint will help you make sure with God what you should or shouldn't say.
Politics, world events, social media content, Jesus could call down angels, but he said, how would the will of God be fulfilled?
And so what he does is he says, hey, you wanna be gentle and lowly in heart,
Exercise some restraint and he gives us countless scriptures for this.
I'll give you some James 1 19 says, know this my beloved brothers, let every person be quick to hear slow to speak, slow to anger.
Where's that at right now?
It's man who can talk first.
So their narrative gets out.
For the anger of man does not produce the righteousness of God.
Therefore, put away all filthiness and rampant wickedness and receive with meekness the implanted word which is able to save your soul.
John Mark Comer said, the digital world trains us to react instantly, not respond wisely.
It trains us to react instantly.
You know why?
Because we can.
It's just some words, send.
to some words, and we used to have to at least pull up our email.
We had those few moments to get our rationale in, but now it's so fast.
And what that can do is fan something in the flame and fan it in the flame and fan it in the flame and no one has wisdom and the reaction is trying to counteract the action.
And it's justified because it says it's doing so and no one stops and thinks, how do I press in with gentleness and humility and empathy
and listening and then stand for what is clearly right.
Proverbs 10, 19 says, when words are many.
Listen, when words are many, transgression is not lacking, but whoever restrains his lips is prudent.
When words are many, transgression is not lacking, but whoever restrains his words.
Proverbs 29, 11 says, a fool gives full vent to his spirit.
Just think about the people who have the TV and the platforms now.
You can name their names.
I'm not going to because it just tick off half the room.
And then I name another name and it tick off the other half of the room.
But you have eyes.
You have ears, my friend, who's giving full vent to his spirit, to her spirit.
And who's the wise man or woman who quickly holds it back and says, hold on.
Let me get in proximity.
Let me look and then let me listen.
What would you do father?
What would you do?
What would you say?
Who is being oppressed?
Who can I stand with and what can I stand against?
I moved here five years ago and I quickly found out
We like Abraham Lincoln around here.
So why not put him in a sermon?
He said, better remain silent and be thought of fool than to speak and remove old out.
Get it, Abe.
Get it, right?
Better to remain silent and be thought of fool and speak and oh, now I know you are.
Now I know you are.
Are our words, social media posts, stories, actions, and anger making it hard for people to see Jesus?
Remember why we're doing this sermon series?
Because we have a mission not to overthrow governments, not to take over the world, not to gain power.
Our mission is to help people find and follow Jesus.
Jesus did not come and throw out Rome.
He came and brought a kingdom that started in our heart.
He'll bring the kingdom to earth.
That's his business.
Our business is to help people find and follow Jesus.
But if they can't see Jesus because of our mouth, because of our pride, because of our anger, because of our harshness, then we can't do the mission.
Gentleness and humility are one of your most powerful tools.
And the difficult part about them is they can only be done on the inside out.
Here's what Jesus did.
Jesus met the world's harsh actions with an equal and opposite reaction of gentleness and humility.
So as you see this world, be harsh, be brutal.
How can I press in?
How can I stand for justice?
And we should stand for justice.
When we see it's wrong, we should be, we should stand up and say it's wrong.
I've said this from the start.
We should pray for those in authority.
We should support them as much as we can.
And we have an obligation to defy them when we must.
I believe it.
But how we do that, how we do that is with gentleness and humility being open to reason.
And we meet the harshness with something they will rarely find even in the church, which is gentleness and humility that started in the heart and overflowed out of us into a broken world.
The world should look at the church and its people and say, how are they like that?
Because they did that with Jesus.
I've never met a man like that.
I'm gonna pray with you, but what I'm gonna ask you to do as we lean into this closing song.
I just want you to think about this while we worship, and then I'm gonna come back up and talk about it for a second.
Do you have a gentle God in your life?
I'm gonna leave that as a cliffhanger and I'll come back up and talk to you about it.
Heavenly Father, thank you for nothing else than who you are.
I thank you, God, that I don't have to wonder what you would do in this cultural moment.
I can look at your life and know what you would do.
I know what you would say.
I know how you would be.
If you had social media, I almost can guess what it would look like.
And so I pray that ours, our mouth, our heart, our passions, where the exclamation points show up in our voice, they show up where yours did.
I pray we stand for the oppressed, the poor, the outsider, those stuck in sin that we won't throw the stones, but God, we will sit with them.
because we know that we are sinners also.
I pray that you will make this local body one that is defined by gentleness and humility.
Ritualist isn't impressive, but they're gentle.
Oh God, give us that testimony.
This is the humble church.
Yes, God.
We would be more powerful than we could ever imagine if that's who we showed up in the world as.
do that work in our hearts.
And as we think about, do we have a gentle God?
I pray you speak to people right now, in Jesus' name.
Amen.
Will you stand in worship with us, please?